Soils having one or more of the following:
1. organic material starting ≤ 40 cm from the soil surface and
having within 100 cm of the soil surface a combined thickness
of:
a. ≥ 40 cm if < 75% (by volume, related to the
fine earth plus all dead plant residues) consists of moss fibres; or
b. ≥ 60 cm; or
2. organic material starting at the soil surface, having a
thickness of ≥ 10 cm and directly overlying ice,
continuous rock or technic hard material; or
3. a layer of coarse fragments that, together with overlying
organic material, if present, starts at the soil surface and has
a thickness of
a. ≥ 10 cm if overlying continuous rock or technic hard
material; or
b. ≥ 40 cm; and 
the major part of the interstices between the coarse
fragments is filled with organic material and the remaining
interstices, if present, are void.
HISTOSOLS
Other soils having:
1. a hortic, irragric, plaggic or terric horizon, ≥ 50 cm thick; or
2. an anthraquic horizon and an underlying hydragric horizon
with a combined thickness of ≥ 50 cm; or
3. a pretic horizon, the layers of which have a combined
thickness of ≥ 50 cm, within 100 cm of the mineral soil
surface.
ANTHROSOLS
Other soils:
1. with all of the following:
a. one or both of the following:
i. having ≥ 20% (by volume, weighted 
average, related to the whole soil)
artefacts in the upper 100 cm from
the soil surface or to a limiting layer,
whichever is shallower; or
ii. having a layer, ≥ 10 cm thick and
starting ≤ 50 cm from the soil surface,
with ≥ 80% (by volume, weighted average, related to the whole soil) artefacts; and
b. not having a layer containing artefacts
that qualifies as an argic, duric, ferralic,
ferric, fragic, hydragric, natric, nitic,
petrocalcic, petroduric, petrogypsic,
petroplinthic, pisoplinthic, plinthic,
spodic or vertic horizon starting
≤ 100 cm from the soil surface, unless
buried; and
c. not having a limiting layer, unless
consisting of artefacts, starting ≤ 10 cm
from the soil surface; or
2. having a continuous, very slowly permeable
to impermeable, constructed geomembrane
of any thickness or technic hard material
starting ≤ 100 cm from the soil surface.
TECHNOSOLS
Other soils having:
1. a cryic horizon starting ≤ 100 cm from the soil surface; or
2. a cryic horizon starting ≤ 200 cm from the soil surface and evidence of cryogenic alteration (cryoturbation, frost heave, cryogenic sorting, thermal cracking, ice segregation, patterned ground, etc.) in some layer within 100 cm of the soil surface.
CRYOSOLS
Other soils having:
1. one of the following:
a. continuous rock starting ≤ 25 cm from the soil surface; or
b. < 20% (by volume, related to the whole soil) fine earth
plus dead plant residues of any size2, averaged over a depth
of 75 cm from the soil surface or to continuous rock,
whichever is shallower; and
2. no duric, petrocalcic, petroduric, petrogypsic, pisoplinthic or
spodic horizon.
LEPTOSOLS
Other soils having a natric horizon starting ≤ 100 cm from the
mineral soil surface.
SOLONETZ
Other soils having:
1. a vertic horizon starting ≤ 100 cm from the mineral soil
surface; and
2. ≥ 30% clay between the mineral soil surface and the vertic
horizon throughout; and
3. shrink-swell cracks that start:
a. at the mineral soil surface; or
b. at the base of a plough layer; or
c. directly below a layer with strong granular structure or
strong angular or subangular blocky structure with an
aggregate size of ≤ 1 cm (self-mulching surface); or
d. directly below a surface crust;
and extend to the vertic horizon.
VERTISOLS
Other soils:
1. having a salic horizon starting ≤ 50 cm from the soil surface; and
2. not having a thionic horizon starting ≤ 50 cm from the soil surface; and
3. not being permanently submerged by water and not located
below the line affected by tidal water (i.e. not located below
the line of mean high water springs).
SOLONCHAKS
Other soils having one or more of the following:
1. a layer, ≥ 25 cm thick and starting ≤ 40 cm from the mineral
soil surface, that has
a. gleyic properties throughout; and
b. reducing conditions in some parts of every sublayer; or
2. both of the following:
a. a mollic or umbric horizon, > 40 cm thick, that has
reducing conditions in some parts of every sublayer, from
40 cm below the mineral soil surface to the lower limit of
the mollic or umbric horizon; and
b. directly underneath the mollic/umbric horizon, a layer,
≥ 10 cm thick, that has its lower limit ≥ 65 cm below the
mineral soil surface, and that has:
i. gleyic properties throughout; and
ii. reducing conditions in some parts of every sublayer; or
3. permanent saturation by water starting ≤ 40 cm from the
mineral soil surface.
GLEYSOLS
Other soils having:
1. one or more layers with andic or vitric properties with a
combined thickness of:
a. ≥ 30 cm, within 100 cm of the soil surface and starting
≤ 25 cm from the soil surface; or
b. ≥ 60% of the entire thickness of the soil, if a limiting layer
starts > 25 and ≤ 50 cm from the soil surface; and
2. no argic, ferralic, petroplinthic, pisoplinthic, plinthic or spodic
horizon starting ≤ 100 cm of the soil surface, unless buried
deeper than 50 cm from the mineral soil surface.
ANDOSOLS
Other soils having a spodic horizon starting ≤ 200 cm from the
mineral soil surface.
PODZOLS
Other soils having a plinthic, pisoplinthic or petroplinthic horizon
starting ≤ 100 cm from the mineral soil surface.
PLINTHOSOLS
Other soils having an abrupt textural difference ≤ 75 cm from the
mineral soil surface and having within the range of 5 cm directly
above or below the abrupt textural difference:
1. stagnic properties, in which the area of reductimorphic
features plus the area of oximorphic features is ≥ 50%
(weighted average, related to the fine earth plus oximorphic
 features of any size and any cementation class) of the total
area; and
2. reducing conditions for some time during the year in some
parts of the soil volume that has the reductimorphic features.
PLANOSOLS
Other soils having:
1. stagnic properties, in which the area of reductimorphic
features plus the area of oximorphic features is ≥ one third
(weighted average, related to the fine earth plus oximorphic
features of any size and any cementation class) of the area
from the mineral soil surface to a depth of 60 cm or to
continuous rock, whichever is shallower; and
2. reducing conditions for some time during the year in some
parts of the soil volume that has the reductimorphic features
within 60 cm from the mineral soil surface or to continuous
rock, whichever is shallower.
STAGNOSOLS
Other soils having:
1. a nitic horizon starting ≤ 100 cm from the mineral soil surface; and
2. from the mineral soil surface to the nitic horizon, a clay
content that is at least half of the weighted average clay
content of the nitic horizon; and
3. no vertic horizon starting above or at the upper limit of the
nitic horizon.
NITISOLS
Other soils having:
1. a ferralic horizon starting ≤ 150 cm from the mineral soil
surface; and
2. no argic horizon starting above or at the upper limit of the
ferralic horizon, unless the argic horizon has, in its upper
30 cm or throughout, whichever is shallower, one or more of
the following:
a. < 10% water-dispersible clay; or
b. a ΔpH (pHKCl - pHwater) ≥ 0 (both in 1:1 solution); or
c. ≥ 1.4% soil organic carbon.
FERRALSOLS
Other soils having:
1. a chernic horizon; and
2. starting ≤ 50 cm below the lower limit of the mollic4 horizon
and, if present, above a petrocalcic horizon, a layer with
protocalcic properties, ≥ 5 cm thick, or a calcic horizon; and
3. a base saturation (by 1 M NH4OAc, pH 7)5 of ≥ 50% from the
mineral soil surface to the layer with protocalcic properties or
to the calcic horizon, throughout.
CHERNOZEMS
Other soils having:
1. a mollic horizon; and
2. starting ≤ 70 cm of the mineral soil surface and, if present,
above a petrocalcic horizon, a layer with protocalcic
properties, ≥ 5 cm thick, or a calcic horizon; and
3. a base saturation (by 1 M NH4OAc, pH 7)6 of ≥ 50% from the
mineral soil surface to the layer with protocalcic properties or
to the calcic horizon, throughout.
KASTANOZEMS
Other soils having:
1. a mollic horizon; and
2. a base saturation (by 1 M NH4OAc, pH 7)7 of ≥ 50%
throughout to a depth of 100 cm from the mineral soil surface
or to a limiting layer, whichever is shallower.
PHAEOZEMS
Other soils having an umbric or mollic or hortic horizon.
UMBRISOLS
Other soils having a petroduric or duric horizon starting ≤ 100 cm
from the mineral soil surface.
DURISOLS
Other soils having:
1. a gypsic or petrogypsic horizon starting ≤ 100 cm from the
mineral soil surface; and
2. no argic horizon starting above or at the upper limit of the
gypsic or petrogypsic horizon, unless the argic horizon
contains secondary gypsum or secondary carbonates,
throughout.
GYPSISOLS
Other soils having:
1. a calcic or petrocalcic horizon starting ≤ 100 cm from the
mineral soil surface; and
2. no argic horizon starting above or at the upper limit of the
calcic or petrocalcic horizon unless the argic horizon contains
secondary carbonates, throughout.
CALCISOLS
Other soils having an argic horizon starting ≤ 100 cm from the
mineral soil surface and having retic properties at its upper
boundary.
RETISOLS
119 18 December 2022
Key to the Reference Soil Groups Principal qualifiers Supplementary
qualifiers
Other soils having:
1. an argic horizon starting ≤ 100 cm from the mineral soil
surface;
and
2. a CEC (by 1 M NH4OAc, pH 7) of < 24 cmolc kg-1 clay in
some subhorizon of the argic horizon within 150 cm of the
mineral soil surface;
and
3. exchangeable Al > exchangeable (Ca+Mg+K+Na)8 in half or
more of:
a. the depth range between 50 and 100 cm of the mineral soil
surface; or
b. the lower half of the mineral soil above a limiting layer
starting ≤ 100 cm from the mineral soil surface,
whichever is shallower.
ACRISOLS
Other soils having:
1. an argic horizon starting ≤ 100 cm from the mineral soil
surface; and
2. a CEC (by 1 M NH4OAc, pH 7) of < 24 cmolc kg-1 clay in
some subhorizon of the argic horizon within 150 cm of the
mineral soil surface.
LIXISOLS
Other soils having:
1. an argic horizon starting ≤ 100 cm from the mineral soil
surface;
and
2. exchangeable Al > exchangeable (Ca+Mg+K+Na)9 in half or
more of:
a. the depth range between 50 and 100 cm of the mineral soil
surface; or
b. the lower half of the mineral soil above a limiting layer
starting ≤ 100 cm from the mineral soil surface
whichever is shallower.
ALISOLS
Other soils having an argic horizon starting ≤ 100 cm from the
mineral soil surface.
LUVISOLS
Other soils having:
1. a cambic horizon
a. starting ≤ 50 cm from the mineral soil surface; and
b. having its lower limit ≥ 25 cm from the mineral soil
surface; or
2. an anthraquic, hydragric, irragric, plaggic, pretic or terric
horizon; or
3. a fragic, thionic or vertic horizon starting ≤ 100 cm from the
mineral soil surface; or
4. a tsitelic horizon with a texture class of sandy loam or finer,
starting ≤ 50 cm from the mineral soil surface; or
5. one or more layers with andic or vitric properties with a
combined thickness of ≥ 15 cm within 100 cm of the soil
surface.
CAMBISOLS
Other soils having fluvic material:
1. ≥ 25 cm thick and starting ≤ 25 cm from the mineral soil
surface; or
2. from the lower limit of a plough layer, ≤ 40 cm thick, to a
depth of ≥ 50 cm from the mineral soil surface.
FLUVISOLS
Other soils having within 100 cm of the mineral soil surface:
1. a weighted average texture class of loamy sand or sand; and
2. layers of finer texture, if present, with a combined thickness of
< 15 cm; and
3. layers with ≥ 40% (by volume, related to the whole soil)
coarse fragments, if present, with a combined thickness of
< 15 cm.
ARENOSOLS
Other soils:
REGOSOLS
